Unlike most of my talks this is not a technical one
actually unlike all my talks, there won't be any code in it
but it's about something I hold very dearly
web standards
I became passion about web standards since I first hear what they are 
and last august I joined W3C to help with their mission
I think develoeprs should know more about 
how the standardization process works for number of different reasons 
not only to contribute 
feed bug, ideas
make them move faster
result better standard
cause that's what we use everyday 
but also to follow standardization 
and exercise some degree of control over the dicision being made 
cause that affect what we do
and they will affected for many years

so after I joined W3C, 
people started asking me lots of questions about how it works
which why giving me the idea of doing this talk, 
these are some of the questions I get 
and if you find by the end of the talk that your question is not answered, 
feel free to grab me I'll be here all day.

The first one is kind of easy, are all web standards made in W3C
W3C makes lots of the web standards 
that we use everyday but not all of them

the ones related to the infrastructure web 
are usually made by IETF, like TCP/IP or HTTP protocol, 
W3C makes pretty much all the languages we use daily
except the javascript core, which are basically the ECMAScript
it's ECMAScript because standardized by ECMA

However, most of the APIs we use like 
XMLHTTPRequest, DOM APIs, selectorAPIs, or Local Storage 
are also from W3C

And that's why I'm focus more on W3C 
not just because I work there, 
so I've more closely observe how it works.

But also because tons of website 
we use everyday are standardized there, 
so I find this lot of confusion about what W3C actually does

Poeple don't ask me exactly this question, what dose W3C do?
But they often tell me saying or asking me question that review, 
there're some information in there, this is what many people believe, 
"All W3C specifications are written by W3C staff. All W3C staff writes specifications, full-time."
tons of people have come and ask me about at W3C like, 
how is it to write specification
that's not even in my job descripttion. so that's a myth

there'e tons of people in W3C that don't do specifications, 
and actually,
specifications are not written by W3C, they're written by the working groups, 
It's the working groups that actually make the sausages, 
I mean write the specs.

So what does W3C do?
W3C just sets the rules, there's a whole process document, 
you can find this address, 
if you want learn more about it, it's very detail, 
probably more detail than you want to know.

But every question you might have will be answered by that
And W3C are also cordinated the process, overseas, what's going on, 
schedule the events like tea park every year,
And W3C also makes the tools, and promote it to education.
For instance, we held W3Conf this year in San Francisco in Feb, 
and there's validator, CSS validator, the HTML validator
that standardized with W3C and W3C also organized their workshops, 
that kind of thing.

By the way, this is the logo for W3Conf, 
I'm really proud of it cause I desgin it.
So since it's W3C working groups that make the stardards, 
what is a working group, what is it made of?
What kind of people are in there? Is just W3C staff?

So a working group, is basically member companies, 
which is big company like browser vendors, big websites,
or any other companies like research, facilities, 
or Companies like Adobe, 
or Hardware companies like Intel.
Anyone that has interest in web standards, 
and this is how W3C gets the funds to operate. 
Unlike the other standardization
* for instance *, have you, 
I guess you've heard about * standards, 
* standards is not free, you can't like go and read * standard, 
you have to pay for it.

So W3C managers to keep standards open 
because it gets the funds need to corperate from this companies, 
they pay like yearly subscription

Obviously, working group have W3C staff in them, 
but we'll see soon web * W3C staff is. 
And some invited experts, 
which are community members have show they'll benefit the working  group 
that've being part of it.
and one of the W3C staff members is designated to be the team contact, 
which brings news from the working group into W3C
So I've told you that there're W3C stuff in every working group, 
right, so you might think, 
it's W3C staff that actually make the standards.

However, most of (every) the working group is actually member companies, 
for instance, the CSS Working Group, there are like 93 people, 
83 of those are from member companies, 
they're only 5 invited experts and 6 W3C stuff, 
including me,
which is like 6.4 percent

And other working groups is even lower, 
W3C stuff is like 4.5 percent or 3.5 percent on the WebApps Working Group 
which is make the selectorAPIS, OR XMLHTTPRequest APIs, or things like that.

it's a bit higher and then turned this into standardization working group 
but also invited the experts.
and the HTML working group is special, 
it has tons of invited experts, 
because practically everyone can become an invited experts. 
You'll just follow the application. 
Every single one of you can become an invited experts in the HTML working group 

So this is the biggest myth that I'm here about W3C. 
W3C creates standards that browsers have implement without having say in it, 
which is not true, 
browsers are like a huge percentage in most of the working groups, 
so that's not true 

So since working groups actually makes the specs, 
how do they do that?
How do working groups works together and make specs?
Who writes these specs?
Do the 94 people in the CSS working group actually edit the specs?
so there're many ways for working group to work together
everyday we have, like the mailing list, or they can chat on IRC
Some of them have a wiki that they use to plan event
register issue and stuff like that, some of them use the bug tracker, 
actually all of them use the bug tracker, but some of them use more than others.
for instance the css working group 
use the mailing list much more than other working groups
and there's a telcon every week, where people call-in 
and listen to what everybody say and speak their mind.

And every 3 month there's also a face-to-face meeting, 
somewhere in the world, every working group have at least one chair,
sometimes it's two, and usually they are the people from the member companies 
but they could be any working group member
they are responsible for cordinating the whole process, 
sending out the agenda before every meeting, 
making all the important decisions, things like that

And this is the spec editors, that actually write the specs, 
the spec editors are usually the peoople from the working groups 
that have the offer, "Hey I want to write the spec, can I do it, plz" 
and the working groups is like 
"yep, suer, plz do" 
sometimes there's the spec editor that do like tons of work, 
for instance in the css working group,
there's *name *name, *fantasai, 
they edit like 90 percent of the specification in css. 

And there are other spec editors that have other things to do, they're busy
and they don't do as much of the spec editing as what expected 
so the specification might stop for years 
that's what happened with CSS transitions and CSS animations, 
and I think CSS transforms as well eventually they change the editors, 
but sometimes what expect too long. 
it's not necessarily in W3C, the only thing that working group can do is change the editor 
we can't like push the editor to work more and he's back. 
So I'm sure that you heard about maturity levels 
like working draft, candidate recommendation, things like that, 
what do this actually mean, when is the spec are ready?
Everything starts from an idea, somebody, 
you or browser vendor or anybody suggest something to working group.
there's some amount of healthy debate, 
let's not forget the very common saying, 
standards are to peace as standardization is to war. 
But eventually the war ends, and peace comes, 
so there can be three possible outcomes basically, either it's accepted, 
and the working group plans to added to spec at some points, 
or it's rejected, that doesn't happened very often, or just forgotten, 
like the discussion stops, nobody bumps it, 
and that happens way more often than it should, unfortunately.

So if you get involved in discussion like that 
maybe you should try to remind people and say, 
hey, somebody will reply to me plz." 

So asuming you get accepted that eventually get into next editor's draft, 
which is like the first stage, every feature goes from the stage, 
it's not a spec yet.

You can't call the editor draft a spec
that could be all kind of crazy things
and editor's draft that nobody check what goes in there.

Any editor could ask things there, and the working group never were proved. 
so it's a mistake that people links to the editor's draft, and they are like, 
"plz implement browser acks. "

Eventually the working group will review, 
the whole working group is suppose to review the editor's draft, 
but usually to few members, 
and we'll get this first public working draft. 
which means this spec is actually started to mature 
and more accepted by the working group, 
but it still not there yet.

We don't usually get implementations at that stage, 
there are many more iterations,

[MATURITY LEVELS] 00:11:47

...

[MATURITY LEVELS] 00:14:37

A question I often hear is, how can I keep up?
There's lot of things happening, 
so what do I do, 
the good things is the W3C very transparent, 
at least in these years. 
in the past it wasn't that transparent but now, 
for the past few years it's been very transparent. 
pretty much everything is public.

Mailing list are usually public 
cause these are on working groups actually have the technical discussion 
W3C specifications are free and public 
which is not the case it with standards 
btw you don't have to keep notes, my slides are online.
Telcon and face-to-face minutes are public, 
even though the telcon and face-to-faace meeting are end.
oh quite often that f2f meeting are often open to auditing 
so one way to keep up is follow thism the mailing list, 
so everybody getting suppose it.
you can find all the standards draft at this link 
and if you don't wanna read standards, 
this is a new effort by W3C along with a number of different companies 
like adobe, facebook, google, hp, mozzilla, 
it's an effort to document the web along with community 
and create like the best documentation that's vendor nuetral 
if you heard about it and want the sticker, 
I have plenty with me, so just find me after with.
and here's a new site, it's not related to W3C at all, but it I quite like it. 
it's how to keep up to date on
"Front and end technologies."
and how's like lots of different ways, conferences, people, staff like that.
